```
=====================================================================
             ___       __  _ __
  ___  _____/ (_)___  / /_(_) /__
 / _ \/ ___/ / / __ \/ __/ / //_/
/  __/ /__/ / / /_/ / /_/ / ,<
\___/\___/_/_/ .___/\__/_/_/|_|
            /_/
=====================================================================
```

# This Website Is Now Available on IPFS, ENS, and Handshake
### 2021-12-30 | #ipfs #distributed

## Intro

In the past few months there has been a lot of chatter about web3 and what it means and doesn't mean for the future of the web. There's a lot of hype around NFTs, mostly because of the money that is exchanging hands, and instead of outright dismissing it I wanted to dive deeper to understand it better.

## Setting up an ENS Domain

I first thought about NFTs when I discovered you can buy => https://ens.domains ENS Domains and then set them up like a standard DNS name with the additional benefit of using them as an identity. I went through the ENS purchase - setting up => https://www.coinbase.com/wallet Coinbase Wallet - and buying the domain with some ETH. My overall impression was is there's a lot of fees. Registering the domain and other actions are relatively inexpensive, but the => https://cryptocurrencysimple.com/all-you-must-know-about-what-are-eth-gas-fees/ gas fees are much higher and take up the bulk of the transaction cost. Skipping over all the details, it cost about 400$ to fully setup ecliptik.eth - registering, reverse lookup to my wallet address, and setting the metadata.

The results of setting up the ENS domain are here, => https://app.ens.domains/name/ecliptik.eth/details ecliptik.eth and it resolves to => https://ecliptik.eth.limo https://ecliptik.eth on IPFS. This name also includes additional features like setting my => https://medium.com/the-ethereum-name-service/nft-avatar-support-for-ens-profiles-bd4a5553f089 Avatar image to an NFT I own (which is one I created myself and put on => https://opensea.io opensea.io for free).

## Setting up a Handshake Domain

The next domain setup was => https://handshake.org Handshake which is a "Decentralized naming and certificate authority" and has an auction process to acquire a Handshake domain. I setup => https://bobwallet.io Bob Wallet and went through the => https://github.com/handshake-org/hs-airdrop airdrop claim to get some HNS. Eventually I ended up using => https://www.namebase.io Namebase to handle the auction and management details and after about 14 days (due to the auction process) I was the new owner of the ecliptik Handshake domain.

The one interesting thing I noticed is that the ecliptik domain was already up for auction when I checked. After some research I found that if you register an ENS domain name and it's not claimed on Handshake, there are bots that will automatically start and auction for it.  Because it was a bot and not someone else trying to buy it, I easily outbid and acquired the name with no counter bids. I also acquired a few other names like amfora and rawtext since I had some more HNS.

Accessing the HNS domain requires some additional software or using DNS servers that support it, the Namebase article => https://learn.namebase.io/starting-from-zero/how-to-access-handshake-sites How to Access Handshake Sites has how to set this all up.

Handshake names are also available using the hns.to domain, and mine is accessible at => https://ecliptik.hns.to https://ecliptik.hns.to

## Mirroring To IPFS

Now that I had the DNS and Handshake domains I had to figure out how to use them. ENS has a lot of documentation on using => https://ipfs.io IPFS to point an ENS domain to, and then it's fully part of the "Distributed Web". After doing some research I found that => https://fleek.co Fleek.co provides free Web, IPFS, ENS, and Handshake features. I followed their setup guide and now whenever I push to main on my => https://github.com/ecliptik/ecliptik.github.io Github Pages repo, it automatically publishes it to IPFS using InterPlanetary Name System (=> https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipns/ IPNS) which resolves the name ecliptik.ens to the current version of this blog.

Now whenever I publish to this blog, it's automatically updated on IPFS and available at => ipns://ecliptik.eth ipns://ecliptik.eth, and via http at => https://ecliptik.eth.limo https://ecliptik.eth.limo.

Accessing ENS and IPFS directly  requires some additional software outside of traditional browsers, but => https://brave.com Brave has support both for ENS and IPFS.

## Wrapping Up

Learning about ENS, Handshake, and IPFS was a lot of fun, and while I highly doubt that web3 is "the future", these technologies have a lot of offer for the future of the Internet. I am particularly fond of IPFS as it reminds me of => https://www.bittorrent.org Bittorrent but without having to setup a torrent/magnet link and seed. Getting started with IPFS is easy, and hosting your own IPFS node locally is a quick and  free way to participate in the distributed web.

I really understood the power of IPFS when I saw the different ways you could use it as a => https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipfs-gateway/ Gateway, enabling any application that uses http to access content on IPFS. This really shines with git and package repositories, see => https://dataswamp.org/~solene/2021-05-01-ipfs-openbsd-69.html OpenBSD 6.9 packages using IPFS for a real-world application.
