___________________________________________
title: This Websites Is Now Available on IPFS, ENS, and Handshake
tags: ipfs distributed
date: 2021-12-30
___________________________________________

In the past few months there has been a lot of chatter about web3 and
what it means and doesn’t mean for the future of the web. There’s a
lot of hype around NFTs, mostly because of the money that is
exchanging hands, and instead of outright dismissing it I wanted to
dive deeper to understand it better.

Setting up an ENS Domain

I first thought about NFTs when I discovered you can buy [ENS
Domains][] and then set them up like a standard DNS name with the
additional benefit of using them as an identity. I went through the
ENS purchase - setting up [Coinbase Wallet][] - and buying the domain
with some ETH. My overall impression was is there’s a lot of fees.
Registering the domain and other actions are relatively inexpensive,
but the [gas fees][] are much higher and take up the bulk of the
transaction cost. Skipping over all the details, it cost about 400$ to
fully setup eciptik.eth - registering, reverse lookup to my wallet
address, and setting the metadata.

  [ENS Domains]: https://ens.domains
  [Coinbase Wallet]: https://www.coinbase.com/wallet
  [gas fees]: https://cryptocurrencysimple.com/all-you-must-know-about-what-are-eth-gas-fees/

The final results of setting up the ENS domain are here
[ecliptik.eth][] and it resolves to [https://ecliptik.eth][] on IPFS.
This name also includes additional features like setting my [Avatar
image to an NFT I own][] (which is one I created myself and put on
[opensea.io][] for free).

  [ecliptik.eth]: https://app.ens.domains/name/ecliptik.eth/details
  [https://ecliptik.eth]: https://ecliptik.eth.limo
  [Avatar image to an NFT I own]: https://medium.com/the-ethereum-name-service/nft-avatar-support-for-ens-profiles-bd4a5553f089
  [opensea.io]: https://opensea.io

Setting up a Handshake Domain

The next domain setup was [Handshake][] which is a “Decentralized
naming and certificate authority” and has an auction process to
acquire a Handshake domain. I setup [Bob Wallet][] and went through
the [airdrop claim][] to get some HNS. Eventually I ended up using
[Namebase][] to handle the auction and management details and after
about 14 days (due to the auction process) I was the new owner of the
ecliptik Handshake domain.

  [Handshake]: https://handshake.org
  [Bob Wallet]: https://bobwallet.io
  [airdrop claim]: https://github.com/handshake-org/hs-airdrop
  [Namebase]: https://www.namebase.io

The one interesting thing I noticed is that the ecliptik domain was
already up for auction when I checked. After some research I found
that if you register an ENS domain name and it’s not claimed on
Handshake, there are bots that will automatically start and auction
for it. Because it was a bot and not someone else trying to buy it, I
easily outbid and acquired the name with no counter bids. I also
acquired a few other names like amfora and rawtext since I had some
more HNS.

Accessing the HNS domain requires some additional software or using
DNS servers that support it, the Namebase article [How to Access
Handshake Sites][] has how to set this all up.

  [How to Access Handshake Sites]: https://learn.namebase.io/starting-from-zero/how-to-access-handshake-sites

Handshake names are also available using the hns.to domain, and mine
is accessible at https://ecliptik.hns.to

Mirroring To IPFS

Now that I had the DNS and Handshake domains I had to figure out how
to use them. ENS has a lot of documentation on using [IPFS][] to point
an ENS domain to, and then it’s fully part of the “Distributed Web”.
After doing some research I found that [Fleek.co][] provides free Web,
IPFS, ENS, and Handshake features. I followed their setup guide and
now whenever I push to main on my [Github Pages repo][], it
automatically publishes it to IPFS using InterPlanetary Name System
([IPNS][]) which resolves the name ecliptik.ens to the current version
of this blog.

  [IPFS]: https://ipfs.io
  [Fleek.co]: https://fleek.co
  [Github Pages repo]: https://github.com/ecliptik/ecliptik.github.io
  [IPNS]: https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipns/

Now whenever I publish to this blog, it’s automatically updated on
IPFS and available at [ipns://ecliptik.eth][], and via http at
https://ecliptik.eth.limo.

  [ipns://ecliptik.eth]: ipns://ecliptik.eth

Accessing ENS and IPFS directly requires some additional software
outside of traditional browsers, but [Brave][] has support both for
ENS and IPFS.

  [Brave]: https://brave.com

Wrapping Up

Learning about ENS, Handshake, and IPFS was a lot of fun, and while I
highly doubt that web3 is “the future”, these technologies have a lot
of offer for the future of the Internet. I am particularly fond of
IPFS as it reminds me of [Bittorrent][] but without having to setup a
torrent/magnet link and seed. Getting started with IPFS is easy, and
hosting your own IPFS node locally is a quick and free way to
participate in the distributed web.

  [Bittorrent]: https://www.bittorrent.org

I really understood the power of IPFS when I saw the different ways
you could use it as a [Gateway][], enabling any application that uses
http to access content on IPFS. This really shines with git and
package repositories, see [OpenBSD 6.9 packages using IPFS][] for a
real-world application.

  [Gateway]: https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipfs-gateway/
  [OpenBSD 6.9 packages using IPFS]: https://dataswamp.org/~solene/2021-05-01-ipfs-openbsd-69.html
