```
=====================================================================
             ___       __  _ __
  ___  _____/ (_)___  / /_(_) /__
 / _ \/ ___/ / / __ \/ __/ / //_/
/  __/ /__/ / / /_/ / /_/ / ,<
\___/\___/_/_/ .___/\__/_/_/|_|
            /_/
=====================================================================
```

# This Website Is Now Available on IPFS, ENS, and Handshake
### 2021-12-30 | #distributed #ipfs 

## Intro

In the past few months there has been a lot of chatter about `web3` and what it means and doesn't mean for the future of the web. There's a lot of hype around NFTs, mostly because of the money that is exchanging hands, and instead of outright dismissing it I wanted to dive deeper to understand it better.

## Setting up an ENS Domain

I first thought about NFTs when I discovered you can buy ENS Domains[1] and then set them up like a standard DNS name with the additional benefit of using them as an identity. I went through the ENS purchase - setting up Coinbase Wallet[2] - and buying the domain with some ETH. My overall impression was is there's a lot of fees. Registering the domain and other actions are relatively inexpensive, but the gas fees[3] are much higher and take up the bulk of the transaction cost. Skipping over all the details, it cost about 400$ to fully setup `ecliptik.eth` - registering, reverse lookup to my wallet address, and setting the metadata.

=> https://ens.domains 1: https://ens.domains
=> https://www.coinbase.com/wallet 2: https://www.coinbase.com/wallet
=> https://cryptocurrencysimple.com/all-you-must-know-about-what-are-eth-gas-fees/ 3: https://cryptocurrencysimple.com/all-you-must-know-about-what-are-eth-gas-fees/

The results of setting up the ENS domain are here, ecliptik.eth[4] and it resolves to https://ecliptik.eth[5] on IPFS. This name also includes additional features like setting my Avatar image to an NFT I own[6] (which is one I created myself and put on opensea.io[7] for free).

=> https://app.ens.domains/name/ecliptik.eth/details 4: https://app.ens.domains/name/ecliptik.eth/details
=> https://ecliptik.eth.limo 5: https://ecliptik.eth.limo
=> https://medium.com/the-ethereum-name-service/nft-avatar-support-for-ens-profiles-bd4a5553f089 6: https://medium.com/the-ethereum-name-service/nft-avatar-support-for-ens-profiles-bd4a5553f089
=> https://opensea.io 7: https://opensea.io

## Setting up a Handshake Domain

The next domain setup was Handshake[8] which is a "Decentralized naming and certificate authority" and has an auction process to acquire a Handshake domain. I setup Bob Wallet[9] and went through the airdrop claim[10] to get some HNS. Eventually I ended up using Namebase[11] to handle the auction and management details and after about 14 days (due to the auction process) I was the new owner of the `ecliptik` Handshake domain.

=> https://handshake.org 8: https://handshake.org
=> https://bobwallet.io 9: https://bobwallet.io
=> https://github.com/handshake-org/hs-airdrop 10: https://github.com/handshake-org/hs-airdrop
=> https://www.namebase.io 11: https://www.namebase.io

The one interesting thing I noticed is that the `ecliptik` domain was already up for auction when I checked. After some research I found that if you register an ENS domain name and it's not claimed on Handshake, there are bots that will automatically start and auction for it.  Because it was a bot and not someone else trying to buy it, I easily outbid and acquired the name with no counter bids. I also acquired a few other names like `amfora` and `rawtext` since I had some more HNS.

Accessing the HNS domain requires some additional software or using DNS servers that support it, the Namebase article How to Access Handshake Sites[12] has how to set this all up.

=> https://learn.namebase.io/starting-from-zero/how-to-access-handshake-sites 12: https://learn.namebase.io/starting-from-zero/how-to-access-handshake-sites

=> https://ecliptik.hns.to Handshake names are also available using the `hns.to` domain, and mine is accessible at https://ecliptik.hns.to

## Mirroring To IPFS

Now that I had the DNS and Handshake domains I had to figure out how to use them. ENS has a lot of documentation on using IPFS[13] to point an ENS domain to, and then it's fully part of the "Distributed Web". After doing some research I found that Fleek.co[14] provides free Web, IPFS, ENS, and Handshake features. I followed their setup guide and now whenever I push to `main` on my Github Pages repo[15], it automatically publishes it to IPFS using InterPlanetary Name System (IPNS[16]) which resolves the name `ecliptik.ens` to the current version of this blog.

=> https://ipfs.io 13: https://ipfs.io
=> https://fleek.co 14: https://fleek.co
=> https://github.com/ecliptik/ecliptik.github.io 15: https://github.com/ecliptik/ecliptik.github.io
=> https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipns/ 16: https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipns/

Now whenever I publish to this blog, it's automatically updated on IPFS and available at ipns://ecliptik.eth[17], and via http at https://ecliptik.eth.limo[18].

=> ipns://ecliptik.eth 17: ipns://ecliptik.eth
=> https://ecliptik.eth.limo 18: https://ecliptik.eth.limo

Accessing ENS and IPFS directly  requires some additional software outside of traditional browsers, but Brave[19] has support both for ENS and IPFS.

=> https://brave.com 19: https://brave.com

## Wrapping Up

Learning about ENS, Handshake, and IPFS was a lot of fun, and while I highly doubt that `web3` is "the future", these technologies have a lot of offer for the future of the Internet. I am particularly fond of IPFS as it reminds me of Bittorrent[20] but without having to setup a torrent/magnet link and seed. Getting started with IPFS is easy, and hosting your own IPFS node locally is a quick and  free way to participate in the distributed web.

=> https://www.bittorrent.org 20: https://www.bittorrent.org

I really understood the power of IPFS when I saw the different ways you could use it as a Gateway[21], enabling any application that uses http to access content on IPFS. This really shines with git and package repositories, see OpenBSD 6.9 packages using IPFS[22] for a real-world application.

=> https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipfs-gateway/ 21: https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/ipfs-gateway/
=> https://dataswamp.org/~solene/2021-05-01-ipfs-openbsd-69.html 22: https://dataswamp.org/~solene/2021-05-01-ipfs-openbsd-69.html

### Tags

=> gemini://rawtext.club/~ecliptik/_tags/ipfs.gmi ipfs
=> gemini://rawtext.club/~ecliptik/_tags/distributed.gmi distributed
____________________________________________________________________

=> gemini://rawtext.club/~ecliptik Home
